The purpose of this section of the book was to consider different definitions of democracy. This ranged from minimalist conceptions (e.g., from [[Joseph Schumpeter]] and [[Adam Przeworski]]) to definitions that try to capture the spirit of what people mean when they say democracy (e.g., [[Larry Diamond]]).

This starts with [[Jean-Jacques Rousseau]]’s [[The Social Contract - Jean-Jacques Rousseau|The Social Contract]] that defines the democratic process as one that brings about the common will of the polity. However, the notion of the common will seems suspect, and seemed so as well to [[Joseph Schumpeter|Schumpeter]]. Dispensing of this idea altogether, [[Capitalism, Socialism, and  Democracy - Joseph Schumpeter|Schumpeter]] proposes a much more minimalist conception of democracy, wherein all that is required is a competitive contest between multiple parties for the votes of the people. [[Minimalist Conception of Democracy - Adam Przeworski|Przeworski]] elaborates on this idea further by analyzing a toy model for the conditions under which such contests arrive at a stable non-violent equilibrium. The main insight here is that stability is undergirded by the loser’s belief that they will one day win in the future and so it is worth it to maintain the current system.

The next notion of democracy is that of deliberative democracy, where [[Democracy and Disagreement - Amy Gutmann and Dennis Thompson|Amy Gutmann and Dennis Thompson]] propose that the core of democracy is that disagreements between individuals should be resolved by deliberations that lead to mutually acceptable decisions. [[Enough of Deliberation (Politics is about Interests and Power) - Ian Shapiro|Shapiro]] disagrees with the thesis of this idea, saying that this conception ignores the more relevant factor of agents’ interests which can prevent the posited upsides of deliberation. In a sub-strand of deliberative democracy, [[The Voice of the People - James S. Fishkin|Fishkin]] tackles the problem of the uninformed citizenry (which is one obstacle to good deliberation) by introducing “deliberative polling,” where a random representative sample of the population takes the time to learn about and deliberate on issues. This is meant to approximate the world in which the entire citizenry gets to make well-informed decisions.

For [[Defining and Developing Democracy - Larry Diamond|Diamond]], the minimalist conception (which he calls electoral democracy) is insufficient. A necessary ingredient that is missing from the electoral conceptions is that of civil liberties, as without this, much of the normative qualities associated with democracy goes away. [[Foreign Affairs]] published two articles ([[The Rise of Illiberal Democracy - Fareed Zakaria]] and [[Liberalism and Democracy - Marc F. Plattner]]) preceding Diamond’s article. Zakaria argues that we should prioritize instilling within regimes constitutional liberalism before democracy and Plattner responds that it isn’t possible to have one without the other in most modern settings.

[[Participation and Democratic Theory - Carole Pateman|Pateman]]’s participatory democracy is a much more maximal conception of democracy. She proposes that a society cannot be truly democratic unless all members are participating in democracy in all of their spheres. Evidence that Pateman points to is the correlation of lack of political participation with socio-economic status, so that modern democracies are in a sense de facto aristocracies. The participatory democracy seeks to expand democracy to all important realms of life, such as the workplace.

Finally, [[Polyarchal Democracy - Robert Dahl|Dahl]]’s project is to maximize the good of popular sovereignty and considering all the requisite conditions to achieve this. Through this, he identifies 8 dimensions along which a society can be more or less democratic, and calls polyarchies to be those societies that are broadly democratic along most or all of these dimensions.